[Music]
Now we will talk a little bit about
dynamic memory management
and smart pointers.
So first of all I want to start
with the most important idiom in C++,
if you want to work with resources.
This the so-called RAII idiom.
So that means: resource acquisition is initialization,
You have very many realizations in C++ of this idiom.
One of them is a smart pointer.
We will talk later about it,
but first of all I want to show you the concept.
So it's not very difficult.
Assume you want to work with a new resource.
So there is one example:
You want to work with dynamic memory.
Another example would be to work with a file, for example
And what you want to do then is:
You want to define a class.
Inside this class you have a lot of members,
let's say you have dynamic memory,
you have there a pointer member
and then at some point you want to allocate
the memory and how and where to do that:
in the constructor.
So you see here in the public part of the constructor
you obtain the resource.
So you write a now "new" and after that you can use
the resource or the memory inside your class
and at the end when you want to release your resource
free your memory in the destructor,
you basically write the "delete".
And this very basic principle is the RAII idom.
So in the constructor you allocate,
in the destructor you deallocate or free.
Now why is it in principle a problem?
because if you have dynamic memory,
then the managing is very error-prone.
It can happen, if you do not follow strictly
this RAII idiom, that you have a memory leak,
because you have a pointer,
you allocated with "new" some memory,
but you just forget to write the corresponding delete.
Then you have a memory leak.
It can also happen that you delete
and afterwards you again try to read or write
to the object, so of course this is also an error.
Or you just try to delete a memory location twice.
All of these things cannot happen,
if you strictly follow the RAII idiom.
Here again the definitions of the operators,
that you need,
so the new and the delete operator.
The delete operator is a library function,
that of course frees untyped unconstructed memory,
that was allocated by the operator "new" before.
You have also the array versions
of "delete" and "new", if you need them.
And the operator "new" is a library function,
that allocates untyped unconstructed memory
of a given size.
So that means, you get raw memory
for arrays, for example if you use
the array version of it.
These library functions provide a more primitive
allocation mechanism
than the library allocator class
that will be on the next slide.
And typically, if you want to write a modern C++ program,
you should use the allocator classes
rather than these low-level library functions.
What is now the standard library allocator class?
This is basically a class,
that also allocates unconstructed memory
and if one uses now "new" the memory is allocated
and the objects are constructed in that memory.
So you get both,
you get allocation
and construction of the objects.
When you allocate a block of memory,
then one often plans to construct objects
in that memory later when needed
and the standard library allocator class allows you that.
So you can basically decouple the construction
from the allocation.
So again, first you say I want to allocate 500 bytes,
but you do not specify
that later on maybe you want to construct
strings inside these 500 bytes.
And the allocator class allows you to do that.
So in the first step allocate the memory
and in the second step later,
you can then create the objects,
that means you call the constructor
and then really get an object
in that memory location.
The classical "new" does both things at the same time.
Then you have member operators "new" and "delete".
They are classical class member functions,
that allow you to overwrite
the default memory allocation, that is performed,
by the global library operator new and operator delete functions.
And you can also of course overload
not only the usual "new", but also the array form.
This member "new" and "delete" functions are implicitly
declared as static.
What they do is they allocate or deallocate the memory
and they are also used automatically
by "new" or "delete" expressions.
So that means for your own class types,
you can also overload these two, "new" and "delete" functions.
And now, what do you need in addition
to the classical "new" and "delete".
when you look at these allocator classes,
you have then a third form of new expression
and this is the so-called placement new expression.
This is used by the allocator,
basically to say, I have already allocated
my memory, but now within this memory
I want to construct a certain object.
So you see it here in the last line "new (sp)".
"sp" is basically the memory location,
that you have allocated before.
And then you have the string.
This is what you want to construct, a string
and "begin", "end", these is just
an iterator interval, that tells you,
how many elements, for example,
you want to allocate.
This is an example how these allocator classes
can be used.
Now general thing about the management of pointer members.
So I have said we have this
RAII idiom, we have pointer members,
but in general it is a problem,
what you do when you copy classes,
that have a pointer member.
And now there are several possibilities:
you can follow the approach, that the pointer member has
normal pointer like behavior.
This means you just copy the pointer and that's it.
So you have no special copy control.
The second option is that you have value like behavior,
that means the object, to which the pointer points,
will be unique and managed separately
by each class object.
So whenever you copy your class,
then also the memory, the pointer points to,
is completely copied.
Of course if you have pointers,
that point to large objects, so many bytes in memory,
then this can be performance critical,
or you have a lot of memory requirement.
And the third option is you use smart pointer behavior.
So what does that mean?
This means that the object to which
the pointer points is shared
and the class itself manages the pointer
and also knows how many pointers point
to that memory location
and also for example prevents dangling pointers.
That's the reason why it's called smart pointer,
because there is some bookkeeping necessary.
Let's briefly summarize again the value semantics.
So when you have value semantics,
then you basically mimic the way
arithmetic types are copied.
That means copies of value like objects are independent.
If you change one of the two objects after copying,
then this has no effect to the original one,
to the other one.
If you have a value like class,
that has pointer members, then you must define
its own copy control members.
And the copy control operations just copy the object
to which the pointer points.
So value like classes,
that contain only other value like classes
or just usual built-in types,
they can often rely on the synthesized copy control members,
because they do exactly this.
In contrast to that the smart pointer
behaves like a pointer,
but adds additional functionality.
One common form of the smart pointer
just takes a pointer to a dynamically allocated object
and assumes the responsibility
for deleting that object.
So the user allocates the object,
but the smart pointer class deletes it.
And it deletes it and at the time,
when no other pointer is pointing
to this memory location.
In order to do that of course
the smart pointer class requires,
that the class implements the copy control members,
to manage the pointer, or the shared object.
And the object is now, as I have said, deleted only,
when the last smart pointer pointing to it is destroyed.
Internally this is very often realized
by use counting.
Use counting is a specific programming technique,
that stores a use count variable
along with the shared object
and then a separate class is created,
that points to the shared object and manages the use count.
And the constructors, other than the copy constructor,
set the state of the shared object
and also set the use count to one.
And now each time new copy is made,
either in the copy constructor or the assignment operator
you also increment the use count.
And when you destroy an object,
then, for example, in the destructor
or in the assignment operator
you decrement the use count.
So that means the assignment operator
and the destructor check whether the decremented use count
is now zero and if it is zero,
they also handling the destruction of the object.
These smart pointers are also included
in the standard library.
So there are different versions of smart pointers,
as we will see in our example codes.
There are the shared pointers,
that allow multiple pointers to refer to the same object.
So this is the standard smart pointer.
In the example you define a shared pointer to integer,
named "pi" and you initialize it
by an integer pointer that you create by "new".
This is the classical shared pointer.
And then there is also the unique pointer,
that owns the object which it points
and the weak pointer, that does not control
the lifetime of the object to which it points.
There are special cases,
where these two have to be used,
or should be used, as we will see
in our examples
[Music]